On top of these UDP and TCP circuits,
we have this idea of protocols.
Protocols are literal languages
that we use to interact with
different kinds of services.
So a really common one on
the internet is HTTP and HTTPS.
HTTPS just has a layer of
TLS encryption over HTTP.
To send emails we use SMTP,
which we're gonna get into.
It's actually a very simple protocol
that's quite similar to HTTP in some ways.
There's also IMAP and POP3,
also text-based protocols that you
can use to read email messages.
There's IRC, which is a really old but
still useful text-based chat protocol.
Then others like FTP,
not used as much anymore, but
SSH is still pretty common.
So all of these different services,
typically,
have kind of like a default port.
This is not always true.
And some of them have several
ports that they typically use.
FTP is kind of a wild card here
because it has a command port.
It's kind of designed a bit
like how satellites work.
Actually, it's pretty interesting because
you have a port that you listen on,
I think it's 21, or 20, or something,
and that's the control port.
And then, FTP will actually go ahead and
open additional ports when
it does a file transfer.
And so it's kind of complicated to set up
a network config for it for that reason.
But it's fascinating because that's also
how, if you have a ground station and
wanna talk to a satellite,
you have usually a low but
more reliable control
frequency that you use.
And then you use a higher frequency
that has more throughput to pull
down weather raster images from
cameras that are pointed at the earth,
that kind of thing, so.
Kind of a fun way to remember how FTP
works, and also, how satellites work.
So each of these different kinds
of systems lives on a usual port.
So these are numbers between 1 and
65,000 or so
that differentiates the service
on the system, for the most part.
You can always run something
on a different port.
And you have to do because on most
systems to bind to a lower port,
you have to have admin privileges or
you have to have special
kind of configuration.
So it's pretty common when you're
developing to run a HTTP server on port
5000 or port 8000 or something like that.
Here's how it was, 21 for
the control port of FTP.
SSH is usually 22, 25 for
SMTP, 80 is HTTP, etc.
IRC has got a bunch of them, but
I think that's the most common
one that's typically used.
So here's something that you
can all try on your system.
If you go ahead and
if you have netcat installed,
you can try nc- lp 1024,
which probably auto works.
So right here,
when you run netcat with dash l,
it listens on a port, and
p tells it what port to listen on.
So if you try to do 1023,
though, it probably won't work.
So I'm gonna go ahead and
do that on my screen.
Whoa, whoa, whoa.
[LAUGH] All right, so
it's installing something.
[LAUGH] So if I listen on 1024,
there we go.
It works because it's just waiting for
connection.
I'll get a little more into how
to use netcat for testing things.
If I do 1023, permission denied.
So this is a default kinda policy
that most Unix C systems have.
I don't know how it works with Windows,
but it might be similar,
it might not, who knows?